---
layout: post
title: Define later
author: shxdow
date: 2021-09-23
permalink: /:title/
description: "Reflections from a recovering victim of mismanagement"
tags: [health, tbd]
aliases: ["tbd", "draft", management failure, uncertainty, anxiety, PTSD, depression, overwork, burnout]
share: true
published: false
toc: true
status: Completed
---

Today I'm here to write about how I almost ruined myself (as far as
development goes) due to a pretty bad work experience. It all started
with what was supposed to be a side gig, something that according to
their words wasn't even "10 hours per week, easily 4". This is a
university backed initiative, run by the engineering management
department, all PhDs. Even though I'm well aware of the fact that a
PhD would not equate to the best possible management performance, I
was pretty confident they could handle it.  I initially was not
conveinced of being able to do it all, a part time job, on top of my
last university semester and a very bad financial situation. I felt I
had my back against a wall and that I had to do something to fix
things once for all. Due to my initial refusal of the offer I was
later talked into  doing it, being made aware of how everyone's first
interest is that I'm able to finish my studies (keep this in mind).
Being in desperate need of money and being less cynic and pessimistic
than my younger self I gave it a shot. I thought I could handle it, I
knew I had a daily schedule that involved 12 hours of working: 4 hours
of studying in the morning, 4 hours to my day job and 4 hours to this
side gig. I knew very well it would have been extremely hard, but I
also knew what I had done in the previous years, all the hardships I
had to face. I thought I had all the ingredients necessary to succeed
in this new journey (albeit in a field I'm not really passionate
about, but that I was willing to try). I was wrong. Or was I ?
