---
layout: post
title: On logic, formal verification and decision procedures - Part II
author: shxdow
date: 2022-03-28
permalink: /:title/
description: "Introduction to first order logic"
tags: [logic, math]
aliases: ["logic", "mathematical logic"]
share: true
published: true
toc: true
status: Completed
---

This entry aims to introduce the concept of what it
means for a program to “decide” or what a decision
procedure is. After that, there will be an
introduction to first order logic, one of the most,
if not the most, fundamental theoretical concepts
necessary.

---
**Table of contents**
* toc
{:toc}
---

# Differences between DNF and CNF

Satisfiability for a DNF formula can be verified in
linear time (at least one of its conjunctions
evaluates to true).

$$
(A \land B) \lor (C \land D); \text{satisfiable}
$$

Validity for a CNF formula can be verified in linear
time if and only if every conjunction is valid.
Given an atomic formula $$A$$, every disjunction
contains both $$\neg A$$ and $$A$$ (recall that
a formula is valid if and only if it is satisfiable
for every interpretation $$I$$)

$$
(\neg A \lor A) \land (\neg C \lor C); \text{ satisfiable}
$$

# Tseytin transformation

One may be interested in proving $$F$$ is satisfiable by 
analysing $$F'$$: a possibly smaller, equisatisfiable formula. The
procedures produces CNF formula at most a constant factor
larger than the starting one (which has to be NNF).

## Equisatisfiability

Two formulae $$F$$ and $$F'$$ are equisatisfiable if
both are satisfiable or if both are not satisfiable.

_Note that equisatisfiability is a much weaker
property than equivalence, two formulaes can be
satisfiable for two different interpretations_

# Decision procedures

Given a formula representing a scenario, one major
problem of interest is to determine
under which condition a formula is _satisfied_
(i.e. evaluates to true for a given interpretation
$$I$$).

## Truth-Table reconstruction

A simple algorithm is consists in
reconstructing the entire truth table in a space-efficient,
recursive manner:

```text
let rec SAT F =
    if F = ⊤ then true
    else if F = ⊥ then false
    else
        let P = CHOOSE vars(F) in
        (SAT F{P ↦ ⊤}) ∨ (SAT F{P ↦ ⊥})
```

## Propositional Resolution

This is a rule of inference, as the name suggests it
is used to deduce clauses starting from a given set of
premises. It works by leveraging a relatively simple
property all CNF formulas in PL have:  

Suppose we have

$$
\underbrace{(A \lor B)}_{C_1} \land \overbrace{(\neg A \lor C)}^{C_2}
$$

In order to satisfy both clauses $$A$$ and $$\neg A$$
can't be taken into account (and shouldn't), $$C_1 \setminus \{A\}$$ and
$$C_2 \setminus \{\neg A\}$$ must be satisfied.



## Davis-Putnam-Logemann-Loveland algorithm (DPLL)

This algorithm is the basis of modern satisfiability
procedures, it extends the algorithm illustrated
before by adding optimizations

## Boolean constraint propagation (or Unit propagation)

Boolean Constraing Propagation is one of the optimizations used at each step of DPLL.
